
My instructor pairs me up with him and says to me privately "go real position on him", an old Carlson Sr. saying, which means green light. 

I heard Javi on a podcast talking about his style of grappling termed “strike based jiu-jitsu”.  The idea was that all the techniques he taught from all positions assumed the partner would be striking. 
The approach was completely revolutionary, but shockingly simple at the same time.  We worked from guard and bottom side control.  
The first thing we broke down was how someone could strike us, then we systematically shut it down by clamping, blocking, pummeling or bridging – movements with which I was already well acquainted.  
The next step was to simply relax and frustrate the opponent by showing them their dominant position would provide them no openings.  
The frustration would lead to reaction which would create the opening for escape. 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Even Marcelo Garcia himself, his newest strategy, his latest strategy - the best jiu-jitsu guy on the planet - says do not do anything in the gi that you can't do no gi because it won't translate and it's not good for your game. 
He's already saying half of what I'm saying. I've been saying that the whole time. Now he's saying it. He's saying it. So, what does that mean, scientifically? Is he more on what I'm saying or more what that guy you're quoting is saying? Marcelo is saying, when you're training in the gi, don't do anything you can't do no gi. 
Stay away from grabbing gi collars and sleeves because you can't do it no gi. He's basically saying what I'm saying now. Why? Because that's the problem. It's not going to help you no gi. He's already confirming it.read entire article...

Roger Gracie said 80 percent of BJJ with the gi is useless in MMA. He said it! Rickson Gracie, quoted, 70 percent of Brazilian jiu-jitsu with the gi is useless in MMA. These guys are saying it. I've been saying it for 11 years and now they're saying it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Roberto Atalla is one of the finest Jiu Jitsu black belts teaching in Europe today. This legendary BJJ instructor and former World Champion is one of the founders of the Rio Grappling Club, an academy that has been producing some of the best European grapplers for the passed few years (more info on Atalla on BJJheroes.com). Roberto Atalla just dropped an interesting statement on his Facebook account about Jiu Jitsu not being for everyone which is something worth reflecting on. Agree or disagree. Here is the statement: 

“No, Jiu-Jitsu is not for everyone. It is for anyone that is serious about doing things right, but not for the faint hearted. It is a perfect sport for older people if they understand their limitations and work around them. It is perfect for unfit people if they just commit to improve their atributes at their own pace, it is also perfect for anyone that can be humble enough to take punishment and come back next day. But most people give up and the World is full of people looking for quick fixes and shortcuts. Listen to me, if you do not understand commitment and perseverance, regardless of what people told you, BJJ is not for you. 

Selling watered programs of our sport is just a way to make quick money for some bastards, but coaches with integrity know that to be taken seriously, BJJ needs sparring and more sparring, putting yourself out of your comfort zone, accepting defeat and learn to win, respect and persistence, and we all know that most people will quit in the first months or year. No, BJJ is for all those who are not shy of working hard and again for the rest of their lives, and the rest of you can stay lazy watching TV on their couches.”

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Your mind is not your friend, Mike… you have to fight with your mind, control it, put it in its place. you need to control your emotions.
Fatigue in the ring is 90% psychological. It’s just the excuse of a man who wants to quit. The night before a fight, you won’t sleep. Don’t worry, the other guy didn’t either. You’ll go to the weigh-in, he’ll look much bigger than you and calmer, like ice, but he’s burning up with fear inside. Your imagination is going to credit him with abilities he doesn't have. Remember, motion releives tension. The moment the bell rings, and you come in contact with each other, suddenly your opponent seems like everybody else, because now your imagination has dissipated. The fight itself is the only reality that matters. You have to learn to impose your will and take control over that reality"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 On Living a Simple Life

If you strive for more material comfort you will get used to it. So then you bust your ass to get even more comfort and you get used to it again. I don’t know … what’s the point?

I try to invest my energy in experiences and not possessions. The immaterial--anything involving my passion like my experiences, languages, and my skill as an artist. Why bust your ass to buy that shit you don’t need?

I’m going to come back from doing seminars in Europe with a little bit of money. I wont buy anything with it. I’ll use it on things involving jiu-jitsu, not on some Rolex watch … but I heard they make some pretty good fake ones now [laughs].

I heard that only 3% of people are doing what the want in life. That’s because sometimes in order to live the life you want, you have to pay your dues. When I first started training I used to live in my car. I would take showers at the beach. I had my little bathroom kit. 
In the morning I would go buy a loaf of bread and a gallon of milk. Back then it was real cheap. That’s how I lived for years.



 Great info on this thread.  Ive been training 20 years and am reasonably healthy.  I attribute BJJ to me being in the good condition that i am in because of my muscular development and physical conditioning.  

IMHO the key is, as 12 said, separating training from competition training.  Im not a competitor.  I practice and teach the traditional GJJ style as best as I can mixed in with modern concepts.  I think one of the elements of traditional GJJ that really facilitates wellness is the removal of impetus to escape.  If you are competition training, you need to force your way in and out of situations because the clock is ticking.  If you have no clock, no points, then you can be patient and wise with your movements.  

For clubs to have a competition class for people who dont mind the additional stress on their bodies is key to being able to separate yourself from those people and that style of jiu jitsu.  

My club prides itself on very few injuries.  We have not had any severe injuries and all of our students are healthy.  As you age of course,  you need to make adjustments to your game.  Understanding things like proper techniques, especially from bottom submissions like the armbar  is key to taking pressure off lower back muscles and hyperextending them.  

It is completely possible to answer your question.  In a killer club with killer competitors, Im not so sure.  My advice is to find a traditional style school and go from there.  





