Here's the thing...when someone asks a higher belt to roll, they are doing so to use the roll as a measuring stick to evaluate how they do against better grapplers. 
In doing so they almost always roll a lot harder than they would against a lower belt. 
I'm just a 4 stripe purple and while I rarely have trouble with lower belts, I don't always want my roll to be like that. 
I'm in BJJ as a hobby. I'm not a competitor and don't always like to have someone going at 100% to get the tap, but instead sometimes want to go at a more 
comfortable pace so that I can train with more people through the night and use my time in a way that benefits more of my goals. 
Sometimes I want to work on specific things that I may not be able to pull off when I am forced to go really hard

Focus on the basics until they were solid as a rock. 
Pay more attention to body mechanics,feel and pressure. 
Focus more on what made the technique work instead of just the technique itself.



sebastard - If the sport of jiu jitsu is a young man's game, then the art of jiu jitsu is a man's game.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 What is a Complete Jiu-JItsu?
My guess is that many people will simultaneously agree and disagree with my five-part list. But I think it is defensible through both the "jiu-jitsu for everyone" and "competitive jiu-jitsu" lenses - the latter including jiu-jitsu's crucial crucible of mixed martial arts.

The Five Factors of a Complete Jiu-Jitsu

1. You can use jiu-jitsu to take a physical conflict in a controlled fashion to the ground.

2. You can use jiu-jitsu to move from a defensive position on the ground to a dominant position on the ground.

3. You can use jiu-jitsu to subdue an adversary from a dominant position on the ground.

4. You can use jiu-jitsu to subdue an adversary from a defensive position on the ground.

5. You can accomplish 1-4 in conflict with an adversary against whom you do not have a significant athletic (size, speed, power) advantage.

I think a lot of people confuse the techniques that can provide someone with a complete jiu-jitsu from the fundamental notion of what a complete jiu-jitsu actually means.

I think a lot of people overthink it, affected more by the innovations in sport jiu-jitsu than by either jiu-jitsu's trial by fire in mid-to-late 20th century vale tudo contests or the practical necessities of individuals seeking to protect themselves from physical harm.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In a recent talk, Master Carlos Gracie Jr. spoke about the subject.

“Many people know a great deal about Jiu-Jitsu, but have very little instinct for the fight. In these cases, the knowledge overrides the instinct. On the other hand, a person with very little knowledge of the fight has a great deal of instinct. The instinct alone is enough to save him/her, protecting from harmful situations, from submission, and allowing the person to be a good fighter,” explains the red-belt Carlinhos Gracie.

“I’ve seeing many times a fighter get out of a position with pure instinct, but not able to explain the position, for not having the awareness of what he/she is doing. If that person one day becomes an instructor, he/she won’t be able to explain the position. During training many times I asked black-belts to explain the position and they always begged me not to do it. They were terrified” remembered the founder of Gracie Barra.


Carlinhos mentions that now at Gracie Barra, we have many black-belts who are training with beginners, as a refresher of the Master Carlosfundamentals, to teach better, eliminate bad habits, and to remember basics that were forgotten.

“The game of a well-trained athlete works only in the beginning. When tired or getting old, his/her Jiu-Jitsu declines sharply,” said Gracie. “The technique, the knowledge and awareness allow us to be calmer in a bad position. A bad position drains a lot of energy and you have to get out nicely in the precise time when your adversary makes a mistake.”

“I’ve always been a fan of the basics. After you have a good solid foundation of Jiu-Jitsu, the rest comes by instinct. You create, invent. The rest is easy. The difficult part is the beginning,” concluded Carlinhos.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"Of every 100 men they send me, 10 should not be here. Eighty are nothing but targets. 
Nine are real fighters, they the battle make. 
Ah, but the one, he is a warrior and he will bring the others back" - attributed to an ancient Greek general

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I once looked in master shens direction... To me it was the most challenging match of my life... For him... It was Tuesday.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If anything the downfall of Jiu Jitsu will BE the tournament scene. Not guys getting stripes after black belt.

Not stressing that this is a FIGHTING art. The MOST EFFECTIVE fighting art, & just calling it a sport, and teaching it as such is what will water it down. But ask yourself when was the last time your school went over striking in the guard? Or clinching against a puncher/kicker?

Many years ago any new technique in the gi had to have a transferable value to a real fight to be considered useful, now that criteria is no longer in place and THAT is the criminal offense that instructors of our art are committing w/ ever more frequency.

Nowadays people cry that "that's what MMA is for!"

No that is what JIU JITSU is for! 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What Connection Rio is not: a five star hotel, luxury spa, luxury resort or anything of the sort.

Not a hotel and different than an average hostel, Connection Rio is a community where indifference of academy banner, nationality or religious preferences create an equality between guests. 
This common ground connects practitioners from around the World at one destination utilizing Jiu-jitsu to create this bond and launch lifelong friendships that begin right here. Friendships developed on the mats and carried onto the street throughout the city of Rio, exploring where our beloved Arte Suave was developed.

If you train Jiu-jitsu it will quickly become obvious that it is one of the World’s best tools for developing equality as there is no difference between a blue collar worker or a multimillionaire entrepreneur on the mat. The difference between practitioners is their personal dedication, work ethic and attitude. Jiu-jitsu clarifies importance of true life vales, that supersede tangible “things” and helps to transfer these values to daily life. These clarified values build a foundation for practitioners to live a healthy and fulfilling life (Jiu-jitsu Lifestyle).

Connection Rio is the dream and aspiration of a man who has helped to break down boundaries and bring Jiu-jitsu practitioners from around the World together in the cradle of BJJ, Rio de Janeiro.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the days leading up to Silva’s UFC 162 bout against Chris Weidman, Renzo Gracie spoke to The Fight Network about Silva and the way his actions affect how people look at Silva:

    Anderson is a guy that rubs many people the wrong way. He’s not a humble guy. Even though he may speak humbly when he talks, when he is in the ring he doesn’t act humble. He puts down his opponents, he acts in a way that again, we always now what is right and what is wrong, and by looking at that we know it’s wrong.  It’s like you can beat your opponent, but do it with respect.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

http://fightland.vice.com/blog/anthony-bourdain-and-other-civilians-throw-on-gis
Were you uncomfortable being in such close contact with another person?
No. Not really. I wrestled a bit in high school. Did the judo thing. I've jumped out of a plane strapped between the legs of a fat Elvis. So I'm comfortable with the man-on-man-action thing. I'm pretty confident that grappling with another man isn't going to cause a late identity crisis.

What was the best part of the training?
Surviving it with honor. I enjoyed that moment of realization that I really do understand the rear-naked choke and could possibly use it in a field situation. (Actually, I realized I have used it, in the kitchen once, to restrain an enraged butcher from killing my sous chef.) 
I'm feeling pretty good about that. If I'm in a bar fight with an enraged vegan and lucky enough to get his back, I'm pretty confident I could stand a chance. It also made a certain kind of "sense" that I didn't anticipate. There is a technical satisfaction in slipping out of a situation. Geometrically, I'm talking about. Like, a couple of times I found myself thinking, "Who knew? This shit actually works! It makes sense."

Would you do it again?
Yes. Yes I would. It's really only a matter of finding a way to do it regularly. Given my ridiculous travel schedule, that might be tough. Maybe I need to hire a Gracie to travel with me.

What did you take away from your lesson? 
Once I got your back, and my hooks in? You're fucked. Okay, not really. 
Maybe if I had your back and my hooks in and a Howitzer. 
But I actually had fun. And came away feeling strangely good about the world. 
I'd actually consider doing it again. In fact, I will do it again. 
And this is a major development.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


I think this quote from Kron kinda sums up the sentiment:

The idea, his father's idea that Kron has adopted, is to do the simple things right with proper leverage and weight distribution applied to your opponent.
"If we spend time doing techniques in Jiu Jitsu competition that wouldn't work in a real fight, what is the point?"? Kron asks.

I've heard many black belts talk about the day the faixa preta is tied around their waist. 
They say they don't feel like they've arrived somewhere - in fact, it's like their journey is only just beginning. 
This used to scare the hell out of me and left me wondering if 10+ years in jiu-jitsu is a 
price worth paying to feel like you're starting out again, but what they were saying is that the black belt 
brings an understanding of just how deep the rabbit hole goes. 


Imagine yourself between two points. On is the contact point on the ground where you are with your back and butt one is the contact point to your opponent when you have him between your legs.

Between these two points is your body and your job is to create a path between the ground and the contact point of your opponent to create stability in your body.

And then you have to feel his center, his hips and have a tight but flexible muscle connection.

In other words you don´t just pull his arms or head and be focused on these things but you are focused on his center you need to get the slack out of your body and get a strong connection between you and him and that will give you a much better control.......and MUCH MUCH more power. 




--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I saw this post in my news feed from Tom Deblass today

"Thankful to be part of an association where all the instructor's train, and since I been with this team for 
over a decade it's been that way, and was before me and will be after. Instructor's must be in shape and train. 
It's easy to stand behind a black belt with a big belly giving order's. 
Get on the mats! On my way to Hamilton to train with the team."

 I agree that the instructor should be on the mat. 
 But in the same way that Freddie Roach isn't expected to go and knock out his disciples, 
 Jiu jitsu instructors shouldn't be expected to beat up everyone as they age.
They should be able to understand leverage and have a deep understanding of what works so as to use 
less strength and more fluidity. 



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"There are no shortcuts in Jiu-Jitsu, on the mats, the truth is always exposed"


Yes, but no one would. You don't have to. I train for sport almost exclusively. When I was in college I had a few 
fights. I was a guard puller in competition at the time of all my fights. 
That doesn't even cross your mind. The lay person gives up his back easily and does not protect his neck. 
Almost all my fights went like this: loud mouth kid throws a haymaker, I close distance and knd of perform a 
duck under, end up behind my opponent, his neck is wide open for the choke. 
This always happened without a single conscious thought. 
My girlfriend saw me fight twice. Her response both times "that was just embarrassing".

Its all just instinct. First thought in a melee "don't go down" second thought "don't get hit". 
Normal people are so bad at fighting you will be fine. By the time you are a purple belt it is completely over kill. 
Competitors tend to be more alpha and have more of a "go for the kill" attitude. And that, in my opinion, gets you 
farther than drilling old school bjj self defense. 




It blows me away that elite level athletes like Rashad Evans catch flak for getting ranked without training much, 
if at all, in a gi, when super one dimensional sport players like the Miyaos have people complaining they are 
sandbaggers even if the Miyaos probably couldn't even spell "takedown".


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unless you are a guy/gal with a very limiting injury with the real possibility for re-injury, you should look to ramp it up every now and then with someone who is highly athletic and motivated. 
The underlying reason (at least for me) for training is to learn skills that will protect me on the streets. 
I am not looking to score 3 pts all the time. I am looking for real life skills to use against a strong, fast, unwilling opponent. 
That is why I got into the martial arts arena, self defense. Guys on the streets are not just going to sit around and play 50% patty cake games when they are trying to hurt me. 
They are going to be moving fast and with violence. We all need a reminder of that sometimes as we get lulled into all the new age bjj point/tournament stuff. Just my take. 


I'm approaching thirty with a lot of bad injuries throughout my life that have essentially turned me into an old man style practitioner.

The younger more aggro training partners go apeshit on me, so I just relax. I'm working on developing the highest pressure game possible in terms of weight distribution. 
I've found that minimizing the amount of movement I have to utilize, and the amount that my training partner can move is more beneficial to a tortoise like me. This is mostly used in my guard passing game.

Patience is another key virtue. I am not eager to escape at the wrong time, or attack needlessly. I'f I'm defending well, I just wait for my training partner to inevitably get to aggressive and expose an escape. 
On the other hand, I attain a dominant position (Mount, Closed Guard, Back and Kesa Gatame are my preferred positions) and secure the position as tightly as possible. If I can use pressure to fatigue my partner I will, then begin my attack. 
Otherwise, I make a valuable grip that will inspire a PREDICTABLE movement on the part of my partner when the opportunity presents itself. There is never a reason to rush.

Remember, speed can come in the form of youth and power, but being loose and relaxed is where true speed comes from. So stay relaxed but alert.


I´am 35 and a blackbelt. Here are some points:

1. Be in shape. You don´t have to be a monster but you should have a decent level of strength and endurance just for the case things doesn´t go the easy way.

2. Pressure. You need to be able to use your weight in a effective way to tire your opponent out if you are on top position. Pressure doesn´t require much energy and you can take away your opponents energy.

3. Combinations and Flow. You should be able to go from one to another move to outgrapple your opponent. Don´t try to outmsucle him and force submissions. Just switch until you get some good chance

4. Internal structure. In my opinion the most important thing. The ability to use your body as a whole without being tensed or to relaxed. It is a combination of structure, awarness and internal muscle control. 
Takes a while to get it but will work without effort.

5. Understand breathing. The right breathing can help you to elevate you game up to 50%. Most people can´t breath freely so you will have an advantage over them.

6. Don´t rush. Take your time and don´t force things. Use chances when they come.

7. Don´t put yourself in position that require extrem flexibility or a bent spine or twistet hip. These postures are always requiering power to work from and that can be difficult.


I have a bit different philosophy on top than some do. Namely, I stay a bit light and nimble on top using some key controls so that I don't lose the position.

I've found that this finesse approach works better for me with really strong guys. Part of the problem is that my pressure is probably just not where it needs to be, but I find using a lot of "brute" pressure (e.g., deep crossface, tight underhook) tends to get me glued to the strong guy who then can use that connection to him to reverse me.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

But the true issues at hand are.....

1. a novice could be influenced by who/what wins and focus their attention around that.

2. Many(?) instructors seem to overemphasize competition and thus structure training with that as the goal, leading to creation of specialized games, strategies and tactics.....to deny this is naive IMHO.

3. as elburrogrande's post indicates....people see these techniques, strategies and tactics as valid and proven, but fail to realize that the environment in which they are proven is controlled and very much artificial.

All this goes back to the numerous threads we've had on here basically boiling down to how some people think overemphasis of sport hurts the effectiveness of the fighting style/art of BJJ, while others disagree. All I know is that people from my "era" seem to hold the former view.....at least IME. Just a couple nights ago a former training partner (brown belt), who was quite involved and accomplished in competition (unlike me) before he stopped training due to a joint problem, commented to me how he disliked much of what he sees currently in BJJ. Some of my old partners work in law enforcement and likewise dislike what they see being trained and emphasized.

Just tonight I once again watched a judo sensei announce the changes in tecniques/tactics/training due to the changes being implemented by IJF.....to me this is an EXCELLENT example of what happens when competition defines the training goals of a style. 


The specialization of BJJ to defeat BJJ takes it further away from it fighting roots. Guys that come into BJJ recently don't seem to understand how/what BJJ training was for, its techniques, strategies and tactics. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. What are the best parts of living the dream and living in Rio training and competing in Jiu-Jitsu?

Living the Dream in Rio and experiencing the “real” Jiu-jitsu lifestyle in Rio de Janeiro is an experience that a person will really only truly appreciate after having done it for themselves. The environment, culture and great training go hand in hand with an experience that allows a deeper understanding of the Arte Suave, found through submersion in the city where it was launch from. There is nothing like hard training with good people, followed by enjoying the nature of Rio’s surroundings (whether it be the beach or rainforest and mountains), smell of fresh air, abundance of fresh fruits and healthy food, sounds of ambient noise and warmth of the people.
Competing in Brazil is a great experience on it’s own as it gives a whole new level of confidence after testing one’s self in the arenas where BJJ was proven and lineage of today’s top athletes had been forged. It is an important piece of understanding for any BJJ practitioner serious about their development and understanding of Jiu-jitsu.

8. How different are the trainings and the mentality of BJJ players in Rio and in the US for ex?

The mentality of BJJ players in Brazil varies greatly from academy to academy. As anywhere there are places where the principal focus is competition and training will always be challenging. In other schools the focus may be much more on the art itself and healthy lifestyle that comes with it.
Most academies here have a tendency to drill / work technique less and spend more time free training. Although it has changed greatly and continues to, there is still for the most part much less appreciation for just how much drilling and specific training can add to the development. *Again, this is not the same with every academy here.




--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

He's getting in a shark tank with no cage. 


Greg Jackson

ER: And the mental part? As part of this training?

GJ: We are supporters of the concept of suffering to win. So we train very hard and work the whole process of 
getting tired, dealing with fatigue, being in pain, etc., as if it were all normal. 
And then, what happens during the fight does not affect you mentally.

ER: What is the biggest problem presented by the athletes who will train at your gym?

GJ: I think the biggest problem for any fighter is not the fight itself, but what happens outside the cage, 
for example, when they are involved in a wrong relationship, or drugs, or fail to train, to engage. 
These are the biggest problems I've seen.

ER: What is essential for a fighter's early career? What he needs to have to be a good fighter?

GJ: A fighter who is starting his career has to be able to deal with disappointments - that's the most important thing. Many fights are canceled, your opponent may get injured, you can lose. If the fighter is able to deal with this disappointment, he can try to move on and eventually get closer to becoming a champion. 
All the great champions of this sport has ever had to deal with many disappointments.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

"We must embrace pain and burn it as fuel for our journey"

3) "Is it harder to get promoted as an older guy?
You need more "skill" to overcome the speed,
strength and more hair that the younger guys have.
Right? (specially the hair!)"
LOL! It can be harder, no doubt, for the reasons
you mentioned. But also consider this. Is it
harder for the 25 year old weakling to get
promoted, or for the 100 lb. woman in a school
disproportionately full of men? Probably for them
too, but focus on the elements we talk about all
the time in this series -- posture, timing,
fundamentals, proper drilling and training methods
-- and the inevitable adaptations will take place.

A weaker student is often seem as "tricky" or
"very technical" for a reason... strength and
power were never an option. They found another
way, but also proved that the other way exists.
And for what it's worth, I recently awarded the
fastest promotion to blue belt I have ever
given... a 9 month white to blue for woman in my
program, who weighs only about 115-120 lbs.   


What we're talking about is technical performance.
So, keeping in mind factors like physical
attributes (which will often have a correlation
with age) and stylistic matchups can have an
impact on who actually beats the other person, we
go by the standard I mentioned at the outset: can
you play the game at a solid technical level with
other people of that technical level, independent
of reliance on physical attributes like strength
and explosiveness? 


To distill it all down:

1) First and foremost, love jiu-jitsu.
2) Focus on performance rather than the voice in
your head. You will get very good, maybe faster
than some and slower than others, but it will
come.
3) Be honest. This game we play is about more than
the physical. Beating people up is easy after a
while. In it's best form it's about becoming a
better human being.

Stephen Whittier
BJJ Performance Professor    

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

perhaps most importantly, we go to our BJJ school, academy, gym or whatever you want to call it, week in and week out, and simply expect it to be there.

We do all these things and, let's face it, we take them for granted. We take it for granted that when we want to buy a gi tailored for our needs (long arms, short legs, extra large / small, patched up / plain, soft, sturdy, striped, rash guard lined, super light competition legal...etc.) then it will be there. Someone will make it and it will be available.

We take it for granted that when we are good enough to wear a darker coloured belt that there will be an instructor who is both qualified* and competent enough to grade us to a blue, purple, brown or even black belt in BJJ! He / she will show up out of nowhere and tie that new belt around our waist and (heaven forbid) that any costs will be involved because that's just blasphemy! 
It cheapens the belt, art of BJJ and whole process if any money is involved in the process of grading. No, I want the instructor to take time out of his daily duties, travel from wherever he / she lives to my local club, teach me this art they bled, toiled and spent time and money to learn and then acknowledge my limitless awesomeness and bestow upon me the new belt.

Most importantly, we take it for granted that when we leave the house and head to the BJJ dojo, it will be there. Someone will pay the rent, sort out the insurance, bring in high quality instructors, buy and maintain the mats, clean them regularly, pay the electricity, sort out a good schedule that has classes at hours that suit our needs (broken down into levels that suit our needs), be a top level coach who spends enough time and resources on learning both the arts and how to teach them in a way that suits us and we don't want to pay a premium amount for that either. No, because that would cheapen the belt, art of BJJ and whole process.

You are more than welcome to have this attitude. We are all free to think any way we wish. I'm simply suggesting here that this is not the healthiest attitude to have. Not for you, not for you BJJ team mates and not for your instructor.

I would like to suggest that you treat the BJJ community you belong to as just that: a community. A community dies very quickly if we just expect and demand it to be there for us and it flourishes if we nurture it and actively participate in it. Here are a few suggestions to how you can do your bit and help support your BJJ academy, you own local BJJ community:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I think there is an inherent culture clash in western martial arts schools that teach Japanese or Japanese-derived Martial arts, such as BJJ...

In a true Japanese "dojo", the students take care of the school. Everyone knows that. It's the way the culture is. All the students,(or everyone below black belt) cleans, takes out the trash, etc.

In a dojo, you are NOT paying the "instructor" to teach you martial arts, you are paying dues to be a member of the dojo. Your responsibilities as a student of the dojo are to follow directions. Period. You're not paying for a "service" you are paying for a membership and the OPPORTUNITY to learn, IF & HOW the instructor feels like teaching you.

So in America (& the west) some of these vestiges like students cleaning, still remain but they cause confusion in our more consumer-oriented ("I pay you to teach me") type of culture.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

“What area of my game, if cultivated maximally for the next few months, would
likely bring about the biggest overall increase in my BJJ performance.”
Could be a strength, could be a weakness, either way I recommend “quotas” as a
main tool for improvement. This is essentially how – even training just with white belts - I’ve been able to specifically hone in on and develop particular areas of my game that I’m now well known for, such as back mount and leg locks.

---------------------------------------------------------------
http://www.grapplearts.com/Blog/2012/04/rickson-gracie-exploring-genius/
One interesting attribute that individuals such as Pablo Picasso, Rudolf Nureyev and Mahatma Gandhi exhibit is entelechy. Entelechy comes from a Greek word meaning “having a goal.” Psychologist Deirdre Lovecky writes: “

Entelechy is a particular type of motivation, need for self-determination, and an inner strength and vital force directing life and growth to become all one is capable of being. Gifted people with entelechy are often attractive to others who feel drawn to their openness and to their dreams and visions. Being near someone with this trait gives others hope and determination to achieve their own self-actualization.”

 I will always remember a seminar Rickson taught in Salt Lake City because Rickson told us over and over that the way we grapple reveals our personality. So, for Rickson, a way of understanding people is not through a verbal conversation but he was able to glean personality types through “rolling.” 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------- 

4. Please tell us more about your academy in the UK and about your best students? What do you offer that other academies don’t offer?

Perhaps I’m not a 50 times world champion like others but man… I tell you as coach I’m very very good! Maybe in this 11 years teaching, my students got 3000 medals in all sort of competitions.
I always try to pass the Carlson Gracie mentality.. Pass and smash! No funky Bjj, no gogoplata,berimbolo and all this faggot stuff.. We do it knee on the face here.
There is no flow rolling here. War has to be the rule at all times, if you can’t take it, you can leave… Many guys didn’t survive our aggressive training and left to other clubs to do Zen Bjj. Here in Carlson, is the place where the children cry and the mother don’t see. If he survives the training he will be a bad mother fucker for sure mate!
One thing I don’t like in my club is a pussy student, here we have fighting Bulldogs.. I want people to know when they see those Bulldogs patches on the other side of the fighting area… You better be ready my friend because it will be nasty.. Ezequiel choke will be over your mouth.. While you are trying your berimbolo someone will crank your foot, better don’t let us pass your guard because knee on the belly will become knee on face, shoulder of justice and other nasty stuff..
That’s how we roll!

. What can tell us about the Carlson Gracie Style of Jiu-Jitsu and mentality?

  In 2013 I already announced after this English Open that I will run 4 hour long competition training for the hardcore team, those guys join those classes will get the HardCore Patch to put on their gi.
Also this training will show who is real keen to be good on Bjj and the other who just want to go the Pub and say “I do Bjj” “I do mma” etc…
 