 want to talk about BASICS for a moment. It is a long read, but you will be the better for it. 
Many times a teacher will show a technique that is considered a basic and will get a "vibe" in the room. I know I have many times. 
The vibe is "I know that". Well, there are many different levels of "knowing" something.

Before I started doing BJJ and was a Black in Japanese JJ and a Brown in Judo. 
I "discovered" the scissor sweep...it was pure gold to me. I have been doing the scissor sweep the longest (years and years) and 
just NOW after 10+ years of doing it does my body feel the precise moment to do it. There is no thought process involved. 
It is just instinctual. It takes years to have a movement to that level. 

When a student says "I know that"..I am sure they can perform it, but can they nail it on people at their same skill level, do they 
know why it works, and when to use it. I am sure Sperry and Riberio know the scissor sweep very well and how to defend it, but I have seen 
Margarida NAIL them with it...a BEGINNER technique...go figure.

Watch Margarida, all basics in comp. Versus Riberio..Ouch Gari takedown to knee over thigh guard pass to knee on belly to baseball bat choke. 
No flash there. All beginers know those moves...but could you catch Riberio with them? 
Supporting claim for my theory of "knowing techniques" on a different level" I am comfortable with the scissor sweep. 
Do I "know" it? Well I could say relatively...but not really...even as a black belt. If I reviewed the sweep with Margarida (his favorite sweep) 
there are probably 10 things I did not know about it. Does Margarida "know" the scissor sweep? Relatively (!). 
If he reviewed it with Carlson (RIP..was alive when I wrote)there are probably 10 things he did not know about it.

I watched Edson Carvalho (my teacher) tap out BJJ BLACK BELTS because they couldnt breathe from pressure at a tournament in Rio with the 
first hold down taught on your first day of judo (after learning breakfalls)...Kesa Gatame. 
I am sure all these black belts knew kesa gatame..and I am sure they all "knew" how to get out. 
So what happened? Edson's "knowing" of Kesa was on a DIFFERENT level than their knowing how to escape.

The beauty of BJJ is that the success or failure of a technique is determined by ONE INCH OR ONE SECOND. Meaning if your hand/foot/hip placement 
was adjusted by an inch you would have nailed it, or if you went for it a second earlier (this is where being instinctual comes in) 
you would have nailed it. WATCH the Mundials. For every crazy acrobatic move, you have 20 basic subs (armbar, triangle, keylock) etc. 
The word BASIC is also misleading. There is really nothing basic about armbars, triangles, scissor sweeps, americanas etc. 
They are called basic because they are usually the first techniques taught...thats it.

Performance of "basics" white through purple:

White Belt - can perform basic moves on unresisting opponent

Blue Belt - gets basics on resisting opponent..usually muscles it

Purple Belt - begins to get timing down and begins developing combos .

Brown & Black - Body FEELS the timing for the technique before your brain begins the cognitive thought process of "I should apply now"

Using the Guard as an example..If you could develop the scissor sweep, armbar, triangle, cross choke, omoplata to the instinctual 
level we spoke of earlier you would have a SICK guard game and would be CRUSHING people. Unfortunately people get those moves to a 
reasonable skill level and then use tricks to fill in the holes (I am guilty of this also). Also, we all know the same things as we are 
all taught them by the same teachers. Lets not discard techniques because we say they "dont work". 

We are trying them on people that were just in the same lesson as you.

When I did my "seven guard choke series" I nailed people with them repeatedly..they knew it was coming but was stuck and tapped. 
Guess what...I cant get them with it anymore. Does that mean the technique does not work?? 
NO. It means I need to raise it to the next level of timing (instinctual) and set-ups (combos). 
I bet if I went to a different school I would be nailing people with it. That is how our game grows. I need to figure out a way to catch 
people with them again. When I do...they will then eventually shut it down again...and on and on it grows.

It is ok to learn tricks, it is ok to know X-guard and Rubber guard. Those are not the foundation to your house though...
those are the windows. Practice the flash and tricks and new advancements in the game. 
BUT...if your basics (hate the word because there are no basic techniques...realize that when i use it) have not improved over the 
last 6 months you are doing something wrong! 
