
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Prado is critical of Checkmat’s Leandro Vieira, who promoted UFC light heavyweight Daniel Cormier directly from white to brown belt:

    “Some Checkmat guys are giving belts too quickly. If you ask those guys, Cormier won’t know how to score a jiu-jitsu fight. How are you going to promote a guy this way? I think it’s a shame you promote a guy to black belt and he doesn’t even know the rules. I’m pissed off with that. I don’t know if the coaches just want to be seen. Here in the U.S., there are a lot of guys promoting students via internet. I can’t understand it. My student Joseph Benavidez is a white belt in jiu-jitsu, and he has defeated five black belts in jiu-jitsu: Wagnney Fabiano, Rani Yahya, Jeff Curran, Miguel Torres and Jussier Formiga,” he said. “But if you ask him what’s a lapel choke, he won’t know. And you ask me why he’s still a white belt. To receive the black belt, you need to know the positions, the origin of the fight, how to do the proper grip at the lapel, hip escaping. There’s no reason to promote Faber to black belt if he can’t teach you a loop choke. That’s the reality of jiu-jitsu. Whenever he has the opportunity he puts on the gi and trains. That’s important.”

Royler told Bloodyelbow:

 

    “Everyone has their own criteria for giving out belts, who am I to criticize someone who is giving out belts? My principles are that the person needs to have a knowledge of self defense, a basic knowledge of Jiu-Jitsu, of the ground, know how to apply a submission with the gi, pass the guard… It doesn’t matter if the guy is tough, because a guy who is only tough does not represent the “finesse” of Jiu-Jitsu. Not that he doesn’t have the conditions to use it, he has the conditions to use a belt. Rashad is the type of guy that can use any belt, he is a “native” tough guy, he trains but he trains without the gi… Who am I to take his belt away? Rolles is the one that gave it to him, I’d endorse it but if he came to my academy he’d need to train with the gi. But I do not challenge [the decision], I am far from challenging that.”
    
    In a interview with tatame, Xande Ribeiro criticized MMA fighters who receive a black belt without in depth knowledge and experience in Jiu-Jitsu:
    
     
    
    “I find this a little embarrassing. It’s a joke! You shouldn’t give a black belt just because the guy is tough. You have to respect the master and your companions. Many people get the black belt to open affiliates of an academy, and that is unacceptable. Another thing that makes me angry is seeing an MMA fighter getting a black belt. MMA is not Jiu-Jitsu. You have to know how to use the Gi, must have commitment to Jiu-Jitsu and your master. Tell him to show a spider guard, a sweep … Who does that is only thinking about fame and money. I’ve trained and tried hard to get a black belt. I’ve Been loyal to teachers and training partners. Jiu-Jitsu is one thing; MMA is another. Respect the art. “


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
——–Balancing Wants and Needs——–

Maynard: I don’t know if you realize how significant it is but, seeing your whole family showing up in support of Royce at the UFC is a very moving image for many people. It seems that you don’t see that kind of family love and pride much anymore.

Rickson: Especially in the big cities. People don’t make the time to give to each other. I think that’s just a sign of our times. Smart are the ones who try to preserve those old elements. People today just want to make money. 
I understand that and respect that but… I find myself in a very fortunate position because I love what I’m doing and I’m good at it. So I make a living.

Maynard: It seems that here in the states, people are more concerned with doing something to make money than they are with doing what it is that they love to do. They decide that money is the goal and then begin to figure out what they’ve got to do to get it. 
They forget to listen to themselves to find out what it is they really are not only best suited for but are passionate about as well.

Rickson: Yes. I think exactly the opposite. You need to make money but it should never be the priority. What you like to do is what you should try your best at doing. The money is gonna come. That’s the way people really get rich, you know? 
They just enjoy what they do and the money comes in some way. It’s the same with the work out. 
Some people think that the workout is to increase heartbeats or flexibility or endurance or coordination. So they make up exercises to improve one of more of these areas. When I’m doing exercise, what I’m trying to do is meditate. Get in a state that I feel a balance between body, mind, and spirit. It’s just enjoyment. 
When I train in Jiu Jitsu I don’t have a clock in mind. I’m just feeling and flowing. When playing or surfing or hiking there are no timings or special rules. If you love it you just get into it with your whole body. You don’t care that it’s exercise.



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


"In the fight, only one person can be comfortable. Your job is to transfer the comfortable from your opponent to you" Rickson Gracie.

6. Don't bring up the "counter" to the move when we are teaching. We know there's a counter to every move. If there was a move with no counters then it would be the only move we would teach. 

"You either have what you want in life, or the excuses why you don't."

I remember him saying BJJ is a jealous mistress; she wont tolerate you doing much of anything else.

One of my favorite moments came after the teaching when Henry was taking questions and he asked if he had been influenced by any of the modern game 
innovations that have been developed in the competitive scene. His answer was directly in line with my own philosophy: “I’m interested in understanding it so I know how to beat it, 
but for my own game anything I see has to pass through a filter that meets this criteria: it has to work for gi, no gi, and if strikes are involved.”

Ryron Gracie.
Not that I've sparred with a lot of high-level guys, but it was like having a conversation with a stranger who finishes your sentences. 

For example, if you showed Carlson that a move he had never seen before, then he might tell you it was a good move that you should keep doing and he even might have you teach it to the class! 
But he had certain criteria: the move had to be a "real position", which meant that, ideally, the move would work even if your opponent was a strong and skilled fighter, 
and the leverage needed to be there so that you had the power to set up and impose your move rather than relying on your opponent to make a mistake.


#7 GOING FAST AND HARD MAKES US ANGRY

“BJJ is about finesse, combinations and going with the flow.  
We understand that up until a certain level your body isn’t trained to relax when it’s in a physical battle.  
But we also know when you can relax and just don’t want to, and that causes injuries.  
So when you decide to can-opener me and cause me injury, you’ll get a little friendly guidance on the rules of rolling and injuries.  
Do it again and we decide to hold onto submissions a little longer and a little harder until you get the point”


Kron Gracie

Kron really tries to finish each submission, this is also the only way to get the proper sense of urgency from his opponents to apply the next submission if he need be.

In trying to finish the cross collar choke, Kron's opponents will posture and push Kron away, in essence straightening their own arms. 
Kron had already been climbing his legs up their back and once he feels them pushing is when he climbs the legs up and over into an armbar. 
There isn't much of a struggle at this point because the arms are so straight, it's hard to clasp the hands and defend.

Kron Gracie's game is far from simple. 
And just like all the other great ones like Marcelo Garcia to Rubens Charles "Cobrinha" Maciel, he baits his opponents to react in the ways he wants.

Sometimes you roll with someone much better than you, and you feel like they know your every move, that they're five steps ahead of you, reading your mind. No they're not. 
They're forcing you to react in those ways. 
They're not guessing what you're going to do, they're manipulating your choices.

Rickson Gracie Association Newsletter

“Even when you spar during training, you should minimize your natural talents.  By limiting yourself, you may find yourself in much worse situation, but you are forced to think your way out, using techniques you would not have otherwise used. When you start doing this, you begin to understand what is really wrong in a certain situation and you begin to understand what actually needs to be done in a technical way in order to improve the situation. You then begin to develop a real, deep progress, understanding the mechanics of any situation.”

“It is important to remember that in a serious fight or in a competition, the mechanics of the fight will be exactly the same as when you are training in a gentle manner. The only important difference will be your mental attitude. When you train, you should put more emphasis on learning than on competing with your partner.”

“You don’t learn when you are fighting, bringing in all sorts of tension and emotion. You learn when you are having fun, training in a smooth and gentle way. You need to work on improving your technique until you are comfortable in any situation. Eventually, you will develop a subconscious understanding of the techniques and they become reflexes. Only after you have done all this you are ready to take your natural abilities “off the shelf” and add them back into your game. Now the effectiveness of the technique will be at least ten times better.”


