



http://msn.foxsports.com/ufc/story/the-art-of-submissions-061214
That counsel appears downright sage in the UFC of 2014, where locks are nearly a thing of the past, and not just against Japanese fighters, but everyone. 
Through 211 fights since the start of the year, only two fights have been finished due to submissions involving locks, and one of them was a kimura combined with an inverted triangle that had its victim Tim Boetsch so checkmated that it was either tap or total shoulder destruction. 

In 211 fights, there has been one armbar.

No straight kimuras. No kneebars or achilles locks. No keylocks or heel hooks. Indeed, it seems as though the fight world has become immune to joint locks. 
When it comes to submissions these days, it's an art. And in 2014, the art of submissions has mostly become the art of chokes.

And as the numbers show, submissions on the whole are getting more and more difficult to pull off. 

As recently as 2006, when the UFC's schedule first began its worldwide expansion, submissions accounted for 32.3 percent of all fight endings. By 2010, that number had sunk to 24.1 percent. So far through 2014, only 15.2 percent of bouts have ended via submission.

So in eight years, the submission rate has been cut by more than half.

When they actually occur, submissions are mostly the culmination of a series of offensive actions and defensive mistakes, a strategic battle that plays out in often slight body movements. Action, reaction, adjustment, repeat until one escapes or the other finishes.

But that is also where the real cat-and-mouse of the whole situation plays out. As major fight teams have focused more on BJJ and brought in specialists to shore up defense, the obvious moves that won fights in years past are no longer working with the same efficacy. The mistakes that used to be common are now rare. Traps that used to bait a limb free or a neck open often come up empty.

With many more tools at their disposal, the defending fighter has the capability of keeping his opponent off-balance, creating space to escape, and threatening a counter-attack of his or her own.

Often, these types of counters will cancel out or nullify the attempts made by the fighter on top. Since they also offer danger, they are bound to lead to more conservative offensive approaches than times past. And therein lies the rub; if you get overly aggressive, you put yourself in jeopardy of losing your position or even being finished.

Tuck's finishing sequence was actually an example of how difficult it is to tap someone in the UFC of today. He ended up doing so, but due to heel strikes to the body, a UFC first. 

Late in the fight, Tuck was on Jake Lindsey's back and attempting to sink in his choking arm. To do so, first he tried misdirection with heel kicks to the body, then he tried to trap Lindsey's arm with his leg. But Lindsey continued to hand fight to keep his neck free, so Lindsey went back to the body with heel strikes that were hardly intended to end his opponent's night.

"I wanted to hit his ribs so he could be in shock and drop his hand and I could sleep him with the choke," Tuck said of his original plan.

"If a person, an athlete is not versed in something, their first reaction when there is a bad situation is not a good feeling. It's panic," said Assuncao. "It's like when you're first learning jiu-jitsu and a guy mounts you or catches your back. You feel weak. You end up using the wrong muscle groups, and you get tired and vulnerable because you don't know how to react."

That's why so many defending fighters will do whatever is necessary to survive, even if that means stalling. Stalemates are a primary cause for referee standups as many many fighters simply attempt to tie up an opponent and wait for a restart. Others are good at creating small openings to return to their feet.

"People are getting really good at using the cage and keeping their back against the cage to get up," Makovsky said. "You see people get taken down and they'll scoot to the cage. If you keep your back secured against cage, nobody can get to your back to finish a submission, and generally it's pretty hard to just catch a submission out of nothing. You have to be in pretty good control of the other person before you can isolate the arm or neck to go for the kill. You can try to catch them in transition, but they're not as controlled so they're better able to escape those situations."






---------------------------------------------------------------

in fact in Northern China.. many guys don't work and are funded by their wives. They are like male lions.. just fight and fuck. 

“What area of my game, if cultivated maximally for the next few months, would
likely bring about the biggest overall increase in my BJJ performance.”
Could be a strength, could be a weakness, either way I recommend “quotas” as a
main tool for improvement. This is essentially how – even training just with white belts - I’ve been able to specifically hone in on and develop particular areas of my game that I’m now well known for, such as back mount and leg locks.

---------------------------------------------------------------
http://www.grapplearts.com/Blog/2012/04/rickson-gracie-exploring-genius/
One interesting attribute that individuals such as Pablo Picasso, Rudolf Nureyev and Mahatma Gandhi exhibit is entelechy. 
Entelechy comes from a Greek word meaning “having a goal.” 

Psychologist Deirdre Lovecky writes: “

Entelechy is a particular type of motivation, need for self-determination, and an inner strength and vital force directing life and growth to become all one is capable of being. 
Gifted people with entelechy are often attractive to others who feel drawn to their openness and to their dreams and visions. 
Being near someone with this trait gives others hope and determination to achieve their own self-actualization.”

 I will always remember a seminar Rickson taught in Salt Lake City because Rickson told us over and over that the way we grapple reveals our personality. 
 So, for Rickson, a way of understanding people is not through a verbal conversation but he was able to glean personality types through “rolling.” 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------- 

4. Please tell us more about your academy in the UK and about your best students? What do you offer that other academies don’t offer?

Perhaps I’m not a 50 times world champion like others but man… I tell you as coach I’m very very good! Maybe in this 11 years teaching, my students got 3000 medals in all sort of competitions.
I always try to pass the Carlson Gracie mentality.. Pass and smash! No funky Bjj, no gogoplata,berimbolo and all this faggot stuff.. We do it knee on the face here.
There is no flow rolling here. War has to be the rule at all times, if you can’t take it, you can leave… Many guys didn’t survive our aggressive training and left to other clubs to do Zen Bjj. 
Here in Carlson, is the place where the children cry and the mother don’t see. If he survives the training he will be a bad mother fucker for sure mate!
One thing I don’t like in my club is a pussy student, here we have fighting Bulldogs.. I want people to know when they see those Bulldogs patches on the other side of the fighting area… 
You better be ready my friend because it will be nasty.. Ezequiel choke will be over your mouth.. 
While you are trying your berimbolo someone will crank your foot, better don’t let us pass your guard because knee on the belly will become knee on face, shoulder of justice and other nasty stuff..
That’s how we roll!

. What can tell us about the Carlson Gracie Style of Jiu-Jitsu and mentality?

  In 2013 I already announced after this English Open that I will run 4 hour long competition training for the hardcore team, those guys join those classes will get the HardCore Patch to put on their gi.
Also this training will show who is real keen to be good on Bjj and the other who just want to go the Pub and say “I do Bjj” “I do mma” etc… 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------- 

In a Question & Answer session, when Mr. Danaher was asked what he intends to do in his future he said:
"For the future, I intend to improve both my own knowledge of this ever evolving sport and my ability to convey its benefits and depth to others. 
Since my childhood I have always believed that in order to make any kind of mark upon the world, a man needs two main things. First, a strong sense of identity. 
A core belief that defines him and answers the fundamental question of "Who am I and What do I stand for?" 
He must possess a core set of values for which he is willing to live and die. 
For me this sense of identity runs as thus: I stand for the application of the powers of reason and knowledge to solve those problems we deem worth solving and to overcome our fears and weakness and make progress towards our goals.
As a child, a big influence upon me was Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's 'The Hound Of The Bakervilles', which is essentially the story of reason being employed to defeat our primordial and irrational fears and instincts. 
The sport of Jiu-Jitsu is a fine example of reason and of trial and error used to overcome complex problems in an environment that naturally creates fear and weakness. 
As such, it fits well with my sense of personal identity.
The second attribute observed among people I have admired is a strong sense of purpose, meaning and direction in their lives. 
The larger the group of people positively affected by this purpose, the more people will be impressed by it and want to become a part of it. 
My sense of purpose is currently bound up with my goal of improving my ability to convey the benefits of learning Jiu-Jitsu to others so that 
their understanding of the working capabilities of their physical bodies and their ability to solve complex, dynamic problems under stress is greatly enhanced, 
creating a carryover effect that positively effects their lives in many other ways."
