Brown to Black:

The journey of brown to black is one of simplification.

If the process described above was fully traveled, and the athlete had a Coach who cared enough about them to keep them at each belt until they were ready, then by the time you reach the stage of a legitimate brown belt you will pose a threat to ever person you touch hands with.

You won’t have any holes in your game. As I mentioned above, it’s impossible to be a legitimate brown belt and have a “poor guard”, or “bad escape game”. You won’t just know every position on the mat; you will be good at every position. “Style” will still make a difference when you roll, but it won’t play nearly as large a part as it does when you are a brand new purple belt. By this stage of learning, even if you are taken out of the positions you prefer to play in, you will still bring plenty of game.


If you read the description above and wonder what the difference is between a brown belt and a black belt, the answer is this. As a good purple belt you had begun the process of developing your own “style”. As I mentioned above, this style is not only subject to change as a purple belt, it’s guaranteed to. But, by the time you reach brown belt that individual style of play has become more solidified. It is identifiable, and it will be a direct reflection of your own personality, build, strengths, weakness, and mindset.

Your task at brown belt is simple; it’s time to perfect your routes.

Using the map analogy, you learned the read and explore the major areas of the map as you went from white to blue. You gained experience and time in the various neighborhoods on the path from blue to purple. And you filled in a lot of detail regarding the entire city on the journey from purple to brown. Along the way you began to figure out what sections of a particular neighborhood, city blocks, specific streets and even ally ways that you prefer to travel. That process of discovering your own preferred routes. . . .that is the process of discovering your own “style”. By the end of the purple belt stage, those particular pathways have been carved out. Now that you are a brown belt, it’s time to perfect those routes.

What to work on:

At brown belt the answer to this should be very simple. It’s now time to be very competitive. It’s time to get in shape, push your body, and push your game. The only way to sharpen those routes, to test those specific directions you have for the map is to wrestle competitively against as many people as possible. You need to spend sometime matching your “style” against other styles. You need to pressure test your game.

As a brown belt you need to be willing to roll with anyone that walks into the Gym. And you have to enter the roll expecting to win.

In order to do this you will need to be an athlete. You will never know how your game works under pressure unless you’re capable of pushing yourself past the point where most people tire out. If you don’t ever experience that level of conditioning, then you may never reach those points where your game becomes tested the way it should be.

You have mastered the fundamentals already. You know the technique. Now it is time to see just how good your body can perform those mechanics. Just how can you be?

As a teacher:

When you’re working with brown belts you have for the most part gone past the point of being a ‘teacher’. Offering new tips or techniques is not what a brown belt needs. To work well with brown belts you need to be a Coach. Your council will revolve more around specific strategies. As one brown belt pits his style against a worthy opponent, advice on how to approach the match, deal with conditioning, and handle pressure all become key areas to work on.

You also have to be willing to let the brown belts go. In other words, let them be a very competitive animal, let them make their mistakes, gain their confidence and fine tune their game. Sometimes the best thing you can do for BJJ athletes at this stage is to get out of their way, give them space, and be their only if asked. A good coach at this stage is a lot like a good butler. You may never notice they are there, but if they are needed they are available right away.

As a student it’s time to push yourself more then you ever have before in BJJ. And if you have never played a serious competitive sport before, then you may be pushing yourself more then you ever have in your lifetime. It’s only in that pressure cooker that your game will finely condense into a working reflection of your own unique self. And that is perfect.

Things to avoid:

As a Coach you need to avoid the trap of needing to always be the ‘expert’. By this time you have probably spent a number of Years being the primary person this athlete has turned to for advise, information, and direction. Now you have to be willing to let go of that role and begin to acknowledge the athlete as more of an equal. Your relationship with them will change, and you can serve as a useful guide in matters of belt evaluations, teaching, and overall thoughts regarding the game. But, you can’t try and hold onto to the same teacher – student dynamic you may have had when this athlete was a white or blue belt.

For the Coach this stage brings up all kinds of issues regarding attachment to self image. And that’s perfect as well.

As an athlete don’t burn out. Be competitive, but keep it fun. Take care of your body, your health, and your overall well being. Make sure you don’t over train, or find yourself mentally drained.

The confidence you gain as a brown belt is invaluable, and it can’t be faked.

No amount of pop psychology nonsense, self hypnosis, or Tony Robbins car salesman insincerity will ever serve as a useful substitute for the true development that takes place when you fully honor the process.

Authenticity can’t be bought, sold, or even taught. It’s only ever found. And you can only ever do it for yourself.

The brown belt stage shouldn’t last more then a couple Years. If your Coach did his job regarding measurement, then you developed the meat of your game as a purple belt. Being a brown belt was a formality of refinement, testing, and self knowledge.

By the end of that time you will have a solid understanding of the entire map. And you will also have your own specific routes, details, “style”, which will be a direct reflection of your own unique persona. And this means you are now a black belt.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This thread is evidence of why promotions should be on an individual basis. People are different and the philosophy of schools differs.

A rigid set of rules for all people doesn't work.

The Judo approach makes a lot of sense to me; successful competitors get promoted faster, non-competitors get promoted slower. This mirrors what we know about competition, that it tends to help people to learn more and grow faster in the art.

But martial arts should also be for whoever wants to do them and non-competitors should have an avenue to get promoted as well.

Traditionally, sport competition was just one part of the BJJ. These days though, many people believe the sport IS the art. I personally don't hold that view, but that is where BJJ is headed. 