Personal Training
Rickson Gracie’s Secret Training
By Mark Eccard

During my early years of training with Rickson Gracie, I was always impressed with how much time he spent doing personal training. 
While jiu-jitsu is built on two-man sparring, there are actually many different types of physical drills and calisthenics that can 
be performed alone or with a partner that will help to build up the muscles that directly contribute to specific 
Brazilian jiu-jitsu positions and transitions. When I first started training with Rickson in 1987 in his garage, 
and then later when he was teaching at the Gracie Academy in Torrance, California, and in his West L.A. school, 
Rickson had such a heavy schedule, teaching the same fundamentals to group after group of beginning students, 
that he rarely had time to train with others at a high level.

To offset this, Rickson had a very involved and specialized set of exercises that he would do for an hour or so each morning, 
which would work his jiu-jitsu muscles to build strength, speed, agility, and endurance. I do not hesitate in saying that 
these exercises were very unique and unlike anything that I, or anyone else for that matter, had ever seen. 
Even to this day, Rickson’s specialized training methods are a closely guarded secret that he has never released to the 
general public. While I don’t feel comfortable releasing the entire exercise set, I do feel that there are parts and 
principles of it that can be applied by any Brazilian jiu-jitsu practitioner or grappler which will improve the entire 
spectrum of their submission game.

I really started to notice the difference in my game when, after doing the exercises with Rickson for nearly two years, 
I was able to easily win the blue belt division of the first Gracie Jiu-Jitsu tournament held in the United States. 
Even though many of the guys I competed against knew the same moves and the same positions, the exercises I had done 
with Rickson gave me a clear advantage in gaining positions, holding positions, and then transitioning to new positions.
As I climbed through the ranks of blue, purple, brown, and even higher, I noticed that the advantages of these specialized 
exercises increased proportionally to the technical level that I was at. Just like Rickson himself, there was never a point 
at which I "outgrew" the exercises. That really helped me to understand why Rickson, the most technically advanced jiu-jitsu 
fighter who has ever lived, kept up his solo exercise regimen every day. On three separate occasions, in the early years of my 
training, when I went to Brazil to train, I was never dominated or physically overpowered by any of even the most advanced belts. 

While I was challenged technically, I never felt at a physical disadvantage, a fact which I attribute to the specialized 
exercises I learned from Rickson Gracie - of course Rickson’s clearly superior jiu-jitsu techniques didn’t hurt either!
Perhaps the greatest testament to its effectiveness was when I won the last of my three championships at the Joe Moreira Tournament. 
I had easily won my weight class the first two years, and so decided to compete in the open division the third year. 
Two of my competitors were from the Machado school and outweighed me by at least 50 pounds. Even though it was fatiguing 
for me to control, manipulate and defeat my first opponent in an eight-minute match, I still had enough energy to 
come back for my second match within ten minutes and submit an opponent who was even heavier!

As I traveled the world with Rickson, giving seminars with him and sometimes having to train and submit 20 or 30 
opponents during one afternoon, I would always perform these exercises in the hotel room at night, or in the morning 
before the seminar started. Even though life on the road is not conducive to effective training, I was always able to 
stay in shape no matter where I was. This, as much as anything, made me a believer. If you can eat hotel food and 
still survive - you must be doing something right!
Effectiveness on the ground comes not just from how you train with others, but also how you train with yourself. 

In the upcoming series of columns I plan to share specific drills and exercises that I learned from Rickson Gracie, or 
developed myself from principles he shared with me, which will enable all ground fighters to develop speed, endurance, 
quickness, strength, and agility without necessarily having many partners to train with.


Personal Training
Chest Exercises
By Mark Eccard

The need to have a strong chest in jiu-jitsu is important. Many positions require the ability to push your opponent away in order to transition from one position to another. Passing the guard is a prime example. Often an opponent will grab you to control your arms and neck to keep you tight in his guard to execute various sweeps, chokes, moves to the back, et cetera. One way to avoid such an attack is the keep your arms extended on an opponent, pushing him away in order to maintain good posture while passing the guard in either a kneeling or standing posture. If your opponent has a good amount of strength to pull you into his guard with his arms and legs, it can require a great deal of chest strength to maintain appropriate distance from your opponent, thereby allowing your head and back to remain straight while attempting to pass the guard. Another good example is making space from the bottom cross-side position - this will also require that you push your opponent far enough away to make the necessary space to bring your knees up to place your opponent inside the guard. This and other such movements require strength in the chest muscles to complete these jiu-jitsu positions. When working exercises to develop strength in your chest muscles it is important to remember that in jiu-jitsu we need to push our opponents away from many different angles - downward, straight, and upwards at every conceivable angle. The training should try to mimic those different angles. In order to accomplish strengthening your push-away ability at different angles, you should do a series of four chest calisthenics every other day.
(1) Keeping your legs spread wide apart in a push-up position with your hips raised up, and your hands approximately shoulder width apart. Rock forward and back to isolate your upper chest, keeping your knees off the ground. You can vary the angle from higher to lower as you proceed through the movement.
(2) Do a straight push-up position that everyone is familiar with.
(3) Start in a customary push-up position except drop the hips down as far to the ground as possible, keeping the back arched through the full range of motion. Pump your arms up and down, keeping the head forward and level, isolating the lower chest muscles.
(4) The last exercise is a sweeping push-up, where you start in a modified push-up position with legs spread apart, arms extended forward, and hips jack-knifed into the air, making an inverted "V." Push your head back towards your feet as far as you can. Bring your chest down and close to the floor, then come all the way forward while raising your head and making a "U" shape.
Do each exercise until you feel the muscles begin to fatigue. Start out doing each of the exercises for 15 seconds each for a total circuit time of one minute. Try to eventually work up to a total time of three minutes. Do these exercises every other day for a month, even when you don’t feel like it, and see if you don’t notice a big improvement in your push-away ability in the guard and bottom cross-side.



Personal Training
Lower Back Development
By Mark Eccard

Lower back strength is an area that is sometimes left out in training exercises, but it is nonetheless very important. Nearly every movement that is done in jiu-jitsu, regardless if it is done with legs, arms, stomach, or neck uses the muscles of the lower back to anchor the movement. This constant use puts much greater strain on the back than most people realize. You often hear people mention the fact that they have hurt their back in sparring or in other daily activities. This is because grapplers forget to strengthen and then warm-up their backs in preparation for hard training.
Back strength is important in many specific jiu-jitsu positions. One that immediately comes to mind is controlling your opponent from their back with the hooks in. In order to control your opponent well, the pressure needed to force your hips forward against your opponent’s struggle to free themselves can be significant. Another common position where the lower back plays a critical role is from the mount, when your hook are underneath your opponent’s legs. In order to completely control your opponent, you again need to force your hips forward and lock them down in order to prevent them from escaping or counterattacking with an aggressive upward bridge and hip throw. This thrusting of the hips forward places a significant workload on your lower back muscles in order to maintain the position.
Another excellent reason to strengthen your back is to maintain symmetrical strength between your abdominal muscles in the front and the muscles on the lower back. The mid-section area, which includes the muscles on the front abdominal muscles and the lower back muscles, is oftentimes referred to as "the core." Having good symmetry between the front and back of the core will enable the grappler to maneuver their hips with more mobility, to gain a better leverage point against their opponent. In an grappling art, and in Brazilian jiu-jitsu in particular, leverage is everything.
There are several exercises which can be used to specifically strengthen the back area of the core that directly applies to grappling and jiu-jitsu movements. The first exercise is start by laying on the stomach, flat on the floor. From this position arch the back and pull up the head and shoulders as high as possible, while simultaneous raising the knees and legs off the floor. With only your stomach and hips touching the floor, rock forward and back in a rocking chair motion until the muscles start to fatigue. The second exercise starts from the same "rocking chair" position. Except this time keep the legs straight with knees off the floor and wiggle your legs up and down in a flutter-kick motion as if you were swimming. Do this motion until the muscles start to fatigue. For the last exercise begin in the same rocking chair position. For this exercise look upward and tilt you chin as far towards vertical as possible. From this position, begin to move your arms forward to back as if doing a swimming breast-stroke. With each stroke backwards tilt your head up, and then lower the head on the return stroke forward.
As with all calisthenics, the best results from doing the lower back exercises will come from being consistent over a long period of time. Be careful to start out very slowly with this particular exercise series. The lower back can become very sore the first few times you concentrate specifically on it. Start out doing each exercise for 15 seconds, for a total circuit time of one minute. Try to eventually work-up to a total time of three minutes. Do these exercises every other day for a month, even when you don’t feel like and see if you don’t notice a big improvement in your lower back strength and your jiu-jitsu and grappling positions.


Personal Training
Securing the Guard
By Mark Eccard

Whether you are a white belt or a black belt, you will always find yourself - at some point in training or in a match - on your back with your opponent in your guard. One of the signature positions of Brazilian jiu-jitsu is, in fact, the guard. Working from the guard allows smaller or weaker fighters to control larger and stronger opponents, neutralize them, and then submit them. The reason the guard is so effective is that it is a very good leverage position.
If you go to a gym, for example, you will notice that the strongest position for lifting weights is the leg press. Even people who don’t lift weights can naturally press a great deal of weight with their legs in this position. I like to refer to this position as the "sled position." If you think about it, the bottom guard position is nothing more than the weightlifting sled position. This means that if done correctly and trained correctly, the guard can naturally generate a great deal of leverage against an opponent.
The primary foundation of the bottom guard is leg strength, and the secondary foundation is the stomach muscles. So in order to correctly train the body to execute the guard with maximum efficiency, these two body areas must be exercised and trained. There exercises I would like to talk about this month, are jiu-jitsu compatible exercises to strengthen the mid-section. There are three basic exercises that I like to perform to strengthen the stomach muscles to improve the guard.
The first exercise is for the lower stomach and starts with laying on your back in the guard position with your knees brought straight up and bent to your chest. From there you straighten them out all the way, keeping your heels off the floor a few inches. Bend you knees and draw your upward over your head. If an even tougher exercise is wanted, an optional movement is to touch your toes to the floor. Injury caution: only try this if you have good flexibility. Once you touch your toes to the floor, bring your knees down and straighten your legs.
The second exercise is for the oblique muscles on the sides of the stomach. Lying on your back, bring you knees up towards you chest at a 45 degree angle. Keep your lower back just above the floor. Move your hips as far as you can from side to side.
The third exercise is for the upper stomach muscles. Lying on your back, raises your knees up, straighten your legs up, and spread your feet out. Keeping your legs stationary, bend your head and while extending your arms out as if to grab your opponent.
Do each exercise until you feel the muscles begin to fatigue. Start out doing these one minute each and try to eventually work up to five minutes each. Do these exercises every other day for a month, even when you don’t feel like it, and see if you don’t notice a big improvement in the movement, strength, and leverage in the guard.



To contact Rickson Gracie trained jiu-jitsu champion Mark Eccard for nationwide semiars, classes in Southern California, or to get more information on his Brazilian jiu-jitsu exercise program, e-mail markeccard@yahoo.com, or visit www.markeccard.com

  